Chesapeake EcoNeighbor

https://econeighbor.squarespace.com

WELCOME TO

Chesapeake EcoNeighbor

Small actions lead to cleaner communities

CASE STUDY

The Problem

The Chesapeake Bay faces serious threats, such as poor water quality, vulnerable habitats and aggressive invasive species. While it will take a lot of work to protect and restore the Chesapeake Bay for future generations there are ways that we can all help today.   

Small actions taken by many people can make a big difference and that’s what we hope to see for the Chesapeake Bay.  If individual citizens are willing to take small actions they can improve their neighborhoods and help protect the Chesapeake Bay for generations to come.  

This case study focuses on behavior change as it relates to environmental stewardship.  Specifically I am interested in ways to encourage individuals to take small and simple actions that can help protect our environment.  The Chesapeake EcoNeighbors concept is a proposed persuasive system to meet the goal of increased environmental stewardship in the Chesapeake Bay region.  The desired outcome is to get area residents to realize the importance of their individual actions and how they can help protect and restore the environment.
The Reason

Why?  A simple but important question.

The Chesapeake Bay is an amazing natural resource, which is famous for beautiful sunsets and delicious seafood.  The Chesapeake supports a wide range of recreational activities, such as swimming, boating and fishing.  It is enjoyed and loved by many.

The Chesapeake Bay watershed spans more than 64,000 square miles, encompassing parts of six states including Delaware, Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia—and the entire District of Columbia. More than 18 million people live in the Chesapeake Bay watershed today and the population continues to grow.

The land-to-water ratio of the Chesapeake Bay is 14:1, which is the largest of any coastal water body in the world. This is why our actions on land have such a big impact on the Chesapeake Bay’s health for today and future generations.

The Audience

The primary audience for this project is the interested public, more specifically homeowners and renters in neighborhoods within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed.   

“Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens 
can change the world; indeed, it’s the only thing that ever has.”
— MARGARET MEAD

Personal Action

Most residents want to improve the environment around them, but many don’t see themselves as part of the problem. This suggests organizations advancing environmental stewardship should emphasize the power of personal action and community engagement in cleaning up local waters feeding into the Chesapeake Bay in order to capitalize on the individual motivation that exists.
Research

In 2017, residents of the Chesapeake Bay region scored a 24 out of 100 on the Citizen Stewardship Index: the first comprehensive survey of stewardship actions and attitudes in the Chesapeake Bay watershed. A Citizen Stewardship Index was developed from this survey to predict future stewardship. The index can be used to determine how likely individuals are likely to take actions in the future to improve water quality and environmental health.  The survey demonstrates that there is a lot of potential for stewardship within the Chesapeake Bay region.  

The Citizen Stewardship Index also uses three scores to predict future stewardship. The closer each score is to 100, the more individuals are likely to take actions in the near future to improve water quality and environmental health. The Likely to Take Personal Actions score—which is currently 25—measures residents’ willingness to consider taking an environmentally responsible action they are not taking today. The Likely to Volunteer and Advocate score—which is currently 65—measures residents’ interest in participating in community efforts or civic activities to improve water quality and environmental health. And the Motivating Attitudes score—which is currently 63—measures five key perceptions that can motivate environmentally responsible behavior.
Neighborhood Awareness

One of the key concepts behind the idea of EcoNeighbor is the idea of social proof.  Social proof is a psychological phenomenon where people reference the behavior of others to guide their own behavior. EcoNeighbor hopes to encourage active participation in neighborhoods by leveraging social networks and social comparison.
Desired Behaviors 

Based on research from the Chesapeake Bay Citizen Stewardship Index, several actions have been identified which have a high potential impact if adopted by more citizens within the watershed.  

Pickup Litter
Several actions with low adoption rates have a significant likelihood of becoming more common. For example, while only 41 percent of residents pick up other people’s litter when they see it, more than 50 percent of the residents who have not taken this action consider themselves likely to do so. Actions like this one could serve as focal points for agencies and organizations working to expand environmental stewardship.

Pick Up After Your Pet
Pick up after your pet. Pet waste contains nutrients and bacteria that can wash into local waterways if left on the ground.

Plant Trees and Shrubs
Plant a buffer of trees and shrubs around the edge of your property to capture polluted runoff.

Rain Barrel
Some actions that have a significant impact on clean water—like using a rain barrel or rain garden to collect rainwater—have not been adopted to their fullest potential.

Volunteer
About one-third of residents have volunteered their time or donated their money to a charitable organization, but less than one in ten residents have done so for an organization that works to protect and restore clean water or environmental health.

Civic Engagement
While a small percentage of watershed residents are civically engaged on behalf of the environment, this engagement has the potential to expand: 43 percent of residents could see themselves attending meetings or publicly speaking out in support of clean water.
The Solution

A mobile application that allows users to track environmentally friendly action that they can take in their local neighborhoods.  The application will encourage users to take actions by providing rewards and incentives.
Science of Persuasion

Throughout this semester we learned many theories and techniques related to persuasion.  One of the most useful papers from the class leveraged in this case study was a conference paper titled A Systematic Framework for Designing and Evaluating Persuasive Systems written by Harri Oinas-Kukkonen and Marja Harjumaa.   This paper builds upon the work of BJ Fogg, to create a practical framework for developing persuasive systems.

Additionally, I can imagine many of the concepts introduced by Daniel Kahneman in Thinking Fast and Slow having relevance to the EcoNeighbor prototype. Concepts such as framing and anchoring could be used to influence user behavior.  Understanding how users process information under the two system model may also help in the design process. 

Below is a series of low fidelity prototypes which demonstrate the expected functionality of the EcoNeighbor's application and the persuasive techniques being leveraged.  The hope is that by leveraging persuasive design patterns that we will be able to "nudge" users into adopting behaviors that will help improve area neighborhoods and ultimately the Chesapeake Bay.

Reduction
Tunneling
Rewards
Self-monitoring
Surface credibility
Expertise
Praise
Personalization
Social comparison
Social learning
Recognition
Trustworthiness
Authority
Suggestion
Reminders
Evaluation

Building a persuasive system is just the beginning.  The next steps include marketing and evaluation.  How might we evaluate the effectiveness of the EcoNeighbor's design?  A few potential ways to evaluate success would include:

Usability testing (begins with low fidelity prototype)
Number of downloads of app
Number of user actions and projects initiated
Number of active users
Number of neighborhoods participating
Review of website analytics
Conducting focus groups
Repeating the Citizen Stewardship Survey
Questions?

I hope that this case study provides insight into my process of creating a persuasive systems and encourage you to ask any questions you might have about the product or process.
